Structure
Main article: Geography of association football

Six confederations and 211 national associations
FIFA confederations

AFC, CAF, CONCACAF
CONMEBOL, OFC, UEFA
vte
Besides its worldwide institutions, there are six confederations recognized by FIFA which oversee the game in the different continents and regions of the world. National associations, and not the continental confederations, are members of FIFA. The continental confederations are provided for in FIFA's statutes, and membership of a union is a prerequisite to FIFA membership.

Asian Football Confederation (AFC; 47 members)[a]
Confederation of African Football (CAF; 56 members)
Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF; 41 members)[b]
Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (CONMEBOL; 10 members)
Oceania Football Confederation (OFC; 13 members)[a]
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA; 55 members)[c]
In total, FIFA recognizes 211 national associations and their associated men's national teams as well as 129 women's national teams; see the list of national football teams and their respective country codes. The number of FIFA member associations is higher than the number of UN member states as FIFA has admitted associations from 23 non-sovereign entities as members in their own right, such as the four Home Nations within the United Kingdom and the two special administrative regions of China: Hong Kong and Macau.

On 28 February 2022, FIFA suspended Russia from all competitions because of their violent and forceful invasion of Ukraine. FIFA often suspends countries because of governance interference, corruption, or financial irregularities. It can also be because of doping or other drugs.[32]

The FIFA Men's World Rankings are updated monthly and rank each team based on their performance in international competitions, qualifiers, and friendly matches. There is also a world ranking for women's football, updated four times a year.

Laws and governance

FIFA headquarters in Zürich, Switzerland
FIFA's headquarters is in Zürich, and it is an association established under the law of Switzerland.

FIFA's supreme body is the FIFA Congress, an assembly of representatives from each affiliated member association. Each national football association has one vote, regardless of size or footballing strength. The Congress assembles in ordinary sessions once every year, and extraordinary sessions have been held once a year since 1998. Congress makes decisions relating to FIFA's governing statutes and their method of implementation and application. Only Congress can pass changes to FIFA's statutes. The congress approves the annual report and decides on the acceptance of new national associations, and holds elections. Congress elects the President of FIFA, its general secretary, and the other members of the FIFA Council in the year following the FIFA World Cup.[33]

FIFA Council – formerly called the FIFA Executive Committee and chaired by the president – is the organization's main decision-making body in the intervals of Congress. The council comprises 37 people: the president; 8 vice presidents; and 28 members from the confederations, with at least one of them being a woman. The executive committee is the body that decides which country will host the World Cup.

The president and the general secretary are the main office holders of FIFA and are in charge of its daily administration, carried out by the general secretariat, with its staff of approximately 280 members. Gianni Infantino is the current president, elected on 26 February 2016 at an extraordinary FIFA Congress session after former president Sepp Blatter was suspended pending a corruption investigation.[34][35]

FIFA's worldwide organizational structure also consists of several other bodies under the authority of the FIFA Council or created by Congress as standing committees. Among those bodies are the FIFA Emergency Committee, the FIFA Ethics Committee, the Finance Committee, the Disciplinary Committee, and the Referees Committee.

The FIFA Emergency Committee deals with all matters requiring immediate settlement in the time frame between the regular meetings of the FIFA Council.[36][37] The Emergency Committee consists of the FIFA president as well as one member from each confederation.[38] Emergency Committee decisions made are immediately put into legal effect, although they need to be ratified at the next Executive Committee meeting.[39]

Administrative cost
FIFA publishes its results according to International Financial Reporting Standards. The total compensation for the management committee in 2011 was 30  million for 35 people. Blatter, the only full-time person on the committee, earned approximately two million Swiss francs, 1.2  million in salary, and the rest in bonuses.[40][41][42] A report in London's The Sunday Times in June 2014 said the members of the committee had their salaries doubled from $100,000 to $200,000 during the year. The report also said leaked documents had indicated $4.4  million in secret bonuses had been paid to the committee members following the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.[43]